Title: Using Claude Code: The Unreasonable Effectiveness of HTML
Author: Simon Willison (link post), Thariq Shihipar (original)
URL: https://simonwillison.net/2026/May/8/unreasonable-effectiveness-of-html/
Examples: https://thariqs.github.io/html-effectiveness/
Date: 2026-05-08

---

Simon Willison's link post:

Thought-provoking piece by Thariq Shihipar (on the Claude Code team at Anthropic) advocating for HTML over Markdown as an output format to request from Claude.

The article is crammed with interesting examples and prompt suggestions like this one:

> Help me review this PR by creating an HTML artifact that describes it. I'm not very familiar with the streaming/backpressure logic so focus on that. Render the actual diff with inline margin annotations, color-code findings by severity and whatever else might be needed to convey the concept well.

I've been defaulting to asking for most things in Markdown since the GPT-4 days, when the 8,192 token limit meant that Markdown's token-efficiency over HTML was extremely worthwhile.

Thariq's piece here has caused me to reconsider that, especially for output. Asking Claude for an explanation in HTML means it can drop in SVG diagrams, interactive widgets, in-page navigation and all sorts of other neat ways of making the information more pleasant to navigate.

---

Thariq's examples page lists 20 self-contained .html files grouped into 9 categories:

1. Exploration & Planning (3) — code approaches side-by-side, visual design directions, implementation plans
2. Code Review & Understanding (3) — annotated PR diffs, module maps, PR writeups
3. Design (2) — living design systems, component variants
4. Prototyping (2) — animation sandboxes, clickable flows
5. Illustrations & Diagrams (2) — SVG figure sheets, annotated flowcharts
6. Decks (1) — arrow-key slide decks
7. Research & Learning (2) — feature explainers, concept explainers
8. Reports (2) — weekly status, incident timelines
9. Custom Editing Interfaces (3) — ticket triage boards, feature flag editors, prompt tuners

Simon also tried this on copy.fail (a Linux security exploit explanation):
> curl https://copy.fail/exp | llm -m gpt-5.5 -s 'Explain this code in detail. Reformat it, expand out any confusing bits and go deep into what it does and how it works. Output HTML, neatly styled and using capabilities of HTML and CSS and JavaScript to make the explanation rich and interactive and as clear as possible'

The result was a rich HTML page with dark theme, callout boxes, two-column layout with high-level summary and numbered steps.
